Title: Florida University School of Business Speech
Date: 2018-07-26
Source: Florida University School of Business</p>

Testing, One million? two million? three million? seems to be working.

I would like to just say a few words momentarily and then the highlight for me will be getting your questions in a few minutes. Because I want to talk about what is on your mind. I urge you to throw hard balls. It's more fun for me if you put a little bit speed on your pitch as they come in. You can ask about everything excepts last week's TexasA&M game. That's all the limits.

We have a couple of men here from SunTrust. I just came from a Cock meeting. I sat next to Jimmy Williams, he has been there for many years. He wanted to be sure that I wore this SunTrust shirt down here. I tried to get sponsorships from the senior golf tour but I ain't have much luck. But now I’m at the banker's tour I'm doing a little bit better than that. He said that I got a few percentage of increase of deposits gains from it. I will all go out for SunTrust. Zero SunTrust.

Warren Buffett: I would like to talk for just one minute to the students about your future when you leave here. Because there is…you’re gonna learn a tremendous amount about investments and you will learn enough to do well. You all have got the IQ to do well. You all have got the initiatives and energy to do well. Or you wouldn’t be here. Most of you will succeed in meeting your aspiration. But, in determining whether you will succeed, there is more to it than intellect and energy. I’d like to talk for just a second about that. In fact, there was a fellow, Pete Kiewit, in Omaha, used to say that: “We look for three things in hiring people. We look for integrity, intelligence, and energy.” And he said that: “The person didn’t have the first two, the latter two will kill them. Because if they don’t have integrity, you want them to be dumb and lazy, you don’t want them to be smart and energetic.” 

I thought I really like to talk about that first one, because we know you have got the second two. Play along with me in a little game for just a second in terms of thinking about that question. We have all been here, I guess, almost all of your second year MBA and got to know your classmate. Think for a moment that I granted you the right to buy 10% of one of your classmates for the rest of his or her lifetime – you can’t pick one with the richest father, that doesn’t count – you got to pick them…somebody who is going to do it on their own merit. I will give you an hour to think about it. Which one are you going to pick among all of your classmates, the one that you want to own 10% for the rest of life time? Are you going to give them an IQ test? Pick the one with the highest IQ? I doubt it. Are you going to pick the one with the best grade? Er…I doubt it. You ain’t going to pick the most energetic one, necessarily, you have been the one who display the most initiatives. 

You are going to start looking for qualitative factors, in additions. Because everybody have got good brain here and are energetic. I would say if you have thought about it for an hour and have decided who you are going to place your bet on, you probably picked the one who you responded the best to. The one who is going to have the leadership qualities. The one who is going to get other people to carry out their interest. That would be the person who is generous, honest, and give credits to other people even if those was their own ideas. All kinds of qualities like that. You could write down those qualities that you admire in these other persons, whoever you admire the most in the class. 

And then, I would throw in a hooker, I would say: “As part of owning 10% of this person, you have to really go short 10% of somebody else in this class. That’s more fun, isn’t it? Then you will think: “Who am I want to go short of?” Again, you wouldn’t pick the person with the lowest IQ, or… You will start thinking about the person, really, who had turned you off for one reason or another. They have various qualities, quite apart from their academic achievements. But they have various qualities, in the end, you really don’t want to be around with them. And other people don’t want to be around with them. What will the qualities that lead to that? That would be a whole bunch of things. It’s the person who is egotistic. Or it’s the person who is greedy. Or it’s the person who is slightly dishonest and cuts corners. All of these qualities. You can write those down on the right-hand side of the page. 

When you look at that…oops…(the microphone is slipping off the podium, and Warren catches it and put it aside) I don’t know which one I’m going to use…can you hear me? Ok with this? Fine…What am I going to do with it (someone is telling Warren to use the microphone attached on his belt)? Oh, it just came loose? Ok. You can see why I avoid technology. Chewing gum is about as far as I get. As you look at those qualities on the right and left hand side, there is one interesting thing about them. It’s not the ability to throw football 60 yards. It’s not the quality to run a 100-yard dash in 9.3. it’s not being the best-looking person in the class. They are all qualities that if you really want to have, the ones on the left-hand side, you can have them. I mean, they are qualities of behaviors, temperaments, characters that are achievable. They are not forbidden to anybody in this group. If you look at the qualities on the right-hand side, the ones that you find turn you off in other people, there is not a quality there that you have to have. If you have them you can…you can get rid of it. You can get rid of them a lot easier in your age than you can in my age. Because most behaviors is habitual. They say: “The chain of habits is too light to be felt, until they are too heavy to be broken.” There is no question about that. I see people with these self-destructive behavior patterns at my age or even 10 or 20 years younger. They really are entrapped by that. They go around and do things that turn off other people right and left. They don’t need to be that way but by a certain point they get so they can hardly change it. But at your age you can have any habits, any patterns of behavior, that you wish. It’s simply a question of which you decide and want to decide the ones that…I mean…if you like. 

Ben Graham did this…Ben Franklin did this before him. Ben Graham in his low teens…looked around…he looked at the people who he admired and he said, you know, “I want to be admire, so why don’t I just behave like them?” He found that there is nothing impossible about behaving like them. Similarly, he did the same thing on the reverse side in terms of getting rid of those qualities. 

I would suggest that if you write those qualities down and think about them a little while. Make them habitual. You will be the one that you want to buy 10 percent when you get old. The beauty is you have already own 100% of you and you are stuck with it. You might as well be that person as oppose to somebody else. 

Warren Buffett: That’s a short little sermon. Let’s get on to what you are interested in. Like I said, you can go all over the lot. I don’t know exactly how we are going to handle this. But, let’s starts with the hand in somewhere or the other. Where should we go? Yeah right here!

Student: Your thought about Japan?

Warren Buffett: My thought about Japan? I’m not a “micro” guy. I say to myself: “Berkshire Hathaway can borrow money for ten years at 1% in Japan now.”1%. And I say to myself: “Gee… I took Graham’s class 45 years ago. I’m been working hard on this thing all my life. Maybe I can earn more than 1%! If I really work hard at it!”1% a year, doesn’t seem impossible, does it? I wouldn’t want to get involved in currency risk so I have to do with something that is Yen-denominated. So I have to be in Japanese real estate, or Japanese business, or something of the sort. All I have to do is to beat 1%. That’s all the money gonna cost me. I can get it for ten years. So far I haven’t found anything.

It’s gotta be interesting. Japanese companies earn very low returns on equity. They have a bunch of businesses that earn 4，5，6% on equity. It’s very hard to earn a lot as an investor when the business you are in doesn’t make very much money. Some people do it. In fact, I got a friend, Walter Schloss, who worked with Graham at the same time I did. It was the first way I went at stocks: to buy stocks selling way below working capital. Very cheap quantitatively stocks. I call it “the cigar butt approach to investing”. You walk down the street and look around for cigar butts some place. You finally see one and its soggy and kind of repulsive, but there is one puff left in it. So you pick it up. The puff is free! I mean it is a cigar butt stock. You got one free puff out of it and you throw it away and walk down the street trying to find another one. I mean it’s not elegant but it works. If you are looking for a free puff, it works! Those were low return businesses. But time is the friend of a wonderful business and is the enemy of a lousy business. If you are in a lousy business for a long time, you gonna get a lousy result, even if you buy it cheap. If you are in a wonderful business for a long time, even if you paid a little bit too much going in, you gonna get a wonderful result if you stay in it for a long time. 

I find a very few wonderful businesses in Japan at present…now. They may change the culture in some way so the management gets more stockholder responses over there. The returns may be higher. But at present time you will find a very…lots of…low return businesses. That’s true even when the Japanese economy was booming. It’s amazing: they had an incredible market without incredible companies. They were incredible in terms of doing a lot of businesses but they weren’t incredible in terms of the return on equity they had achieved. That has finally caught up with them. So we have so far done nothing there. But as long as money is 1% I will keep looking.

Warren: Yeah! (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question).

Student: You were rumored to be one of the rescue buyers of Long Term Capital Management. What was the play there? What did you see?

Buffett: well there’s a story in the current Fortune magazine, the one has Rupert Murdoch’s picture on the cover that tells the whole story of our involvement. It’s kind of interesting story because… it’s a long story so I won’t go into all the background of it. But I got the really serious call about Long Term Capital about four weeks ago this Friday… whenever it was. It was my granddaughter…I got there in midafternoon… my granddaughter was having her birthday party that evening and then I was flying that night to Seattle to go on a 12-day trip with Gates to Alaska…on a private plane…all kinds of things. I was really out of communication. But I got this call on a Friday afternoon saying things were really getting serious there. I had some other calls before that article gets into…a few weeks earlier. I know those people – most of them – pretty well. A lot of them were in Solomon when I was there.

The price was imploding and the Fed was sending people up that weekend. Between that Friday and the following Wednesday, when the New York Fed in effect orchestrated a rescue effort but without any federal money involved. I was quite active but I was having this terrible time because we were sailing up through these canyons which were of no interest for me whatsoever in Alaska. The captain would say: “you know, if we just stay over here we might see some bears and wales.“  I said: “stay where you got a good satellite connection!” That was the picture. Unfortunately, I got all things going off all behind me and I got my back to it – I’m on a phone which was – the people, the group – they find it funny the way I’m working on the phone. 

We put in a bid on Wednesday morning. By then I was in Bozeman, Montana, I talked to Bill McDonough, the head of New York Fed by 10 o’clock. They were having a meeting with bankers at 10 o’clock that morning in New York. We called them…we actually delivered the message when he called me out there in Wyoming a little bit before 10, New York time. We made a bid. Because it was being done in a long distance, everything was really the outline of a bid. In the end, I was in a bid for 250 million essentially for the net assets. We would have put in three or three-quarters billion on top of that. It would have been three billion from Berkshire Hathaway 700 million from AIG and 300 million from Goldman Sachs. We submitted that but with a very short time limit with that. Because when you’re bidding on hundred-billion-dollar worth of securities that are moving around. You don’t wanna leave a fixed price bid out there very long plus we were worried about it would be getting shorted. In the end the bankers made the deal. It was an interesting period.

The whole Long Term Capital Management, I hope most of you are familiar with it, the whole story is really fascinating. If you take John Meriwether, Eric Rosenfeld, Larry Hilibrand, Greg Hawkins, Victor Haghani, the two Nobel Prize winners, Merton and Scholes – if you take the sixteen of them – they probably have the highest average IQ than any sixteen people working together in one business in the country, including Microsoft or whatever you want to name. Incredible amount of intellect in that room. Now you combine that with the fact that those sixteen had extensive experience in the field they are operating. These are not a bunch of guys would make their money, you know, selling men’s clothing and all out of sudden went in the securities business or any. They had, in aggregate, the sixteen, probably 350 or 400 years of experiences doing exactly what they were doing. Then you throw into the third factor, most of them had virtually all of their very substantial net worth in the business, so they have their own money up, hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars of their own money up. Super high intellect, working in the field they know, and essentially they went broke. That to me is absolutely fascinating. 

If I have to write a book it’s going to be call “why do smart people do dumb things.” My partner says it should be autobiographical. This might be interesting illustration. These are perfectly decent guys. I respect them and they helped me out when I was having problems in Solomon. They are not bad people at all. But, to make money they didn’t have and didn’t need, they risked what they did have and did need. That’s foolish. that’s just plain foolish. I don’t know what such IQ is. If you risk something that is important to you, for something that is unimportant to you, it just does not make any sense. I don’t care whether the odds are a hundred one you succeed or a thousand one to succeed. If you hand me a gun with a thousand chambers, a million chambers, and there is one bullet in one of the chambers. You say, “put it up to your temple how much do you want to be paid to pull the trigger once?” I’m not gonna pull it. You can name any sum you want but it doesn’t do anything for me on the upside. I think the downside is fairly clear. I’m not interested in that kind of game. Yet, people do it financially without thinking about it very much.

There was a great book…not a great book, only with a great title…it is a lousy book written once with a great title by Walter Gutman, the title was “you only have to get rich once.” Now that seems pretty fundamental, doesn’t it? If you got a hundred million dollars at the start of the year and you are gonna make ten percent of your unleveraged – twenty percent if you are leveraged – 99 times out of 100, what difference does it make the end of the year if you got a 110 million and 120 million? Makes no difference at all! If you die at the end of the year, the guys who writes the story makes a typo. He may say 110 million even if you have 120 million, so you’ve gained nothing at all. It makes absolutely no difference! Makes no difference to your family, makes no difference to anything. Yet, the downside, particularly when you’re managing other people’s money is not only losing all your money but also disgrace and humiliation facing friends for money you have lost. I just can’t image an equation that makes sense for it yet sixteen guys with very high IQs, very decent people, entered that game. I think it is madness. It’s produced by an overreliance, to some extent, on things – those guys would tell me back when I was in Solomon that a six-sigma event wouldn’t touch or seven-sigma. But they are wrong. 

History does not tell you the probability of future financial things happening. They had a great reliance on mathematics and they felt that the beta of a stock told you something about the risk of a stock. It doesn’t tell you a damn thing about the risk of a stock in my view. Sigma does not tell you about the risk of going broke in my view, maybe in their view now too.

I don’t like even to use they as an example because the same thing in different ways can happen to any of us probably, where we really have a blind spot about something that is crucial because we know a whole lot about something else. It’s like Henry Kaufman said in the other day:” the people who are going broke in this situation are two types: the ones who knew nothing and the ones who knew everything.” It’s sad in a way. I urge you…in anything…we never basically borrow money – although we got float through insurance business. I never borrowed money: I never borrowed when I had 10,000 bucks basically. What difference that can make? I was having fun as I went alone. It didn’t mean anything when I had 10,000 dollars or a million dollars or 10 million dollars except if I have a medical emergency or something that comes along. But I’m gonna do the same things when I have a lot of money or when I have very little money. 

If you think about the difference between me and you in terms of how we live. We wear the same cloth basically. All right, SunTrust gives me mine. We all have a chance to drink the juice of god here. We all go to McDonald or, better yet, Dairy Queen. We live in a house that’s warm in the winter and cool in the summer. We watch the Nebraska and Texas A&M on a big screen. You see it in the same way I see it. We do everything… our life ain’t that different, you know. You will get decent medical care when something happens to and I will get decent medical care. The only thing we do differently is we travel differently: I ride around this little plane and I love it. That takes money. But if you leave that aside, other than travel, think about it, what can I do that you can’t do? I get to work in a job that I love, but I always work in a job I love. I love it just as much when it was a big deal if I made a thousand bucks. I urge you to work in jobs you love. 

I think you are out of your mind if you keep taking jobs that you don’t like because you think it’ll look good on your resume. I was with a fellow at Harvard the other day who was taking me over to talk to him. He was 28 and he told me what he had done in life, which is terrific. Then I said: “What are you going to do next?” He said: “Well, after I get out of my MBA, I think maybe I’ll go work for a management consulting firm because it looks good on my resume. I said: “Wait a second. You are 28, you have been doing all these things. I mean you have got a resume that’s 10 times as good as anybody I have ever seen.” I said: “If you take another job you don’t like, doesn’t a little like saving up sex for your old age?” There comes to a time when you ought to do what you are going to do – I think I’m out of the boarder of the question – If you ought to take a job when you get out of college, don’t take a job you think it’s going to look good on your resume. Take the job you love. You may change later on but you will jump out of the bed in the morning. 

When I got out of Columbia, the first thing I tried is to go to work for Graham immediate. I offer to work for him for nothing. He said I was overpriced. But I kept pestering. I went to Omaha and sold securities for three years. I kept writing him and giving my ideas. Finally, I went to work for him a couple of years. It was great experience. I always really work in a job that I love doing. 

You should really take a job that if you are independently wealthy you will take.  That’s the job to take because that’s the one you’re going to have great fun and you’ll learn something, you’ll be excited about it and you can’t miss. You may go do something else later on but you’ll get way more out of it. I don’t care what the starting salary is or anything of the sort – I don’t know how I got off on that but there I am – I do think that if you think you’re going to be a lot happier if you’ve got 2X instead of X, you’re probably making a mistake. I mean you ought to find something you like. Works with that. You’ll get into trouble if you think making 10X or 20X is the answer to everything in life. Because then you will do things like borrow money when you shouldn’t or maybe cut corners on things your employer doesn’t want you to cut corners on. It just doesn’t make any sense. You don’t like it when you look back on it.

Buffett: Yep! (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question).

Student: Can you talk to the students about companies that you like? I don’t mean names. I mean what makes the companies…companies that you like.

Buffett: I like…I like businesses I can understand. Let’s start with that. That narrows down about 90%. There are all kinds of thing I don’t understand, but fortunately there is enough I do understand. You have this big wide world out there, almost every company publicly owned. So you have all American businesses practically available to you. To start with, then it makes sense to go with things that you think you can understand. You can understand something. I can understand this! (Buffett is holding a tin of cherry-favored Cola) You can understand this, everybody can understand this! This is a product that basically hasn’t changed when they take out the cherry. You know, since 1886, or whatever it was, it is a simple business. It’s not an easy business, I don’t want a business that is easy for competitors. I want a business with a moat around it. I want a very valuable castle in the middle. Then I want the duke who’s in charge of that castle to be honest and hardworking and able. Then I want a big moat around the castle. 

That moat can be various things. The moat in a business…like our auto insurance business, GEICO, is low cost. I mean, people have to buy auto insurance so everyone’s gonna have one auto insurance policy per car basically…per driver. I can’t sell them 20, but they have to buy 1. What are they gonna buy? They gonna buy on…base on service and cost. Most people will assume the service is fairly identical among companies or close enough. So we’re going to do on cost! I gotta be the low-cost producer. That’s my moat. My cost got further lower than the other guy? I’ve thrown a couple of sharks into the moat. All the time, if you got a wonderful castle, there are people out there are trying to attack it, taking away from you. I want a castle I can understand but I want a castle with a moat around it. 

30 years ago, Eastman Kodak’s moat was just as wide as Coca Cola’s moat. I mean if you gonna take a picture of your six-month-old baby and you’re gonna want to look at that picture 20 years from now, or you’re gonna want to look at that 50 years from now – you never got a chance because you are not professional photographer so you’re gonna to evaluate what’s gonna look like 20 or 50 years ago. What is in your mind about that photography company is what counts because they are promising you that the pictures you take today is going to be terrific to look at 20 years, 30 years, 50 years from now, about something that is very important to you. May be your own child or whatever may be. Well, Kodak had that in spades 30 years ago – they owned them. They had what I call “share of mind.” Forget about share of market. Share of mind. 

They had something in everybody’s mind around the countries, around the world. The little yellow box or anything that said “Kodak is the best.” It’s priceless. They have lost some of that. They haven’t lost them all. It’s not due to George Fisher. George is doing a great job. But they let that moat narrowed. They let Fuji come and start narrowing the moat in various ways. They let them get into the Olympics and take away that special aspect that only…only Kodak was fit to photograph the Olympics. Fuji gets there. Immediately in people’s minds, Fuji becomes more in parity with Kodak.   

You haven’t seen that with Coke. Coke’s moat is wider now than it was 30 years ago. You can’t see the moat (change) day by day. But every time, an infrastructure gets built in some country that hasn’t yet been profitable for Coke, but will be 20 years from now, the moat is widening a little bit. Things are all the time changing in one direction or the other. 10 years from now you can see the difference. 

Our managers of our business we run, I got one message to them, which is “widen the moat.” We wanna throw crocodiles and sharks and everything else, gators I guess, into the moat to keep away competitors. That comes about through service. That comes about through quality of product. That comes about through cost. That comes about sometimes through patents. That comes about through real estate location. So that’s the business I’m looking for.

Now, what kind of business I’m gonna find like that? Well, I’m gonna find them in simple products. Because I’m not going to be able to figure out what the moat is going to look like for Oracle, or Lotus, or Microsoft ten years from now. I mean, Gates is the best businessman I ever run into. He got a hell of a position. But I really don’t know, what their business is going to look like ten years from now. And I certainly don’t know what their competitors are going to look like ten years from now. Now they’re the names I don’t own. I know what the chewing gum businesses are going to look like ten years from now. The Internet is not going to change everyone chew gum. Nothing much else is going to change how we chew gum. There are going to be lots of new products. Really, are spearmint, juicyfruit, all those, going to evaporate some day? They ain’t gonna to happen. If you give me a billion dollars and tell me to go into chewing gum business and trying to make a real dent in Wrigley’s. I can’t do it. That’s the way I think about businesses. I say to myself, give me a billion dollars, how much am I gonna to hurt this guy? Give me ten billion dollars…give me ten billion dollars, how much am I gonna hurt Coca-Cola around the world? I can’t do it. Those are good businesses. Give me some money and tell me to hurt somebody in some other fields, I can figure out how to do it. 

So I want a simple business, easy to understand, great economics now, honest and able management. Then I can see about, about in a general way, where they are going to be 10 years from now. If I can’t see where they are going to be ten years from now? I don’t want to buy it. Basically, I don’t want to buy any stock were they close the New York Stock Exchange tomorrow for 5 years I won’t be happy owning it. I buy a farm and I don’t get a quote on it for 5 years I’m happy if the farm does OK. You know, I buy an apartment house, don’t get a quote on it for 5 years, I’m happy if the apartment house produces the returns that I expect. But people buy a stock and they look at the price next morning and they decide whether they are doing well or not doing well. It’s crazy. Because they are buying a piece of business. That’s what Graham…most fundamental part what he had taught me. You are not buying a stock, you are buying a part ownership of the business. You will do well if the business does well if you didn’t pay a totally silly price. That’s what it all about. You ought to buy businesses you understand. Just like if you are buying a farm, you are going to buy a farm you understand. It’s not complicated. Call it just Graham Buffet? I mean, it’s just pure Graham. 

I was very fortunate cuz I picked up a book when I was 19. I got interested in stock when I was 6 or 7. I bought my first stock when I was 11. I was playing around with all the stuff. You know, I had charts and volumes and I’m making all kinds of technical calculation or everything. And I then picked up a little book and it just said that you are not buying some little ticker symbol that bounces around every day. You are buying a part of a business. Since I started thinking about it in that wiring, everything else followed. Very simple. So we buy businesses we think we can understand. There is no one here who can’t understand the Coca-Cola company. I can say there is no one here who can understand some new internet companies. I said at the annual meeting this year: “If I were teaching a class in a business school. On a final exam, I will pass out the information on new internet companies and ask each student to evaluate them. Anyone who can give me an answer I will flunk.”

I don’t know how to do that. But people do it every day. It’s more exciting, if you look at it as if it’s going to race or something. That’s a different thing. But you are in investing. Investing is putting out money to be sure getting more money back later at an appropriate rate. To do that you have to understand what you are doing at it. You have to understand the business. You can understand some businesses but not all businesses.

(Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question)

Student: Warren, you have covered half of it, which is trying to understand the businesses and find businesses. But you had also alluded to getting a return on the amount of capital you invested in the businesses as an investor. That comes back to what you are paying for the businesses. How do you determine what you think it is the fair price to pay for the business?

Buffett: it’s a tough thing to decide but it…I don’t want to buy anything if I’m not terribly sure of. If I’m terribly sure of it probably doesn’t offer incredible returns. I mean, why should something is essentially a cinch to do well, offering you 40% a year or something like that. So we don’t have huge returns in mind. But we do have in mind never lose anything. I mean, we bought Cee’s Candy in 1972. Cee’s Candy was then selling 16 million pounds of candy at $1.95 a pound. It was making 2 bits of pound or 4 million pre-tax. We paid 25 million dollars for it. It took no capital to speak of. When we look at that business, basically my partner Charlie and I really decide whether there is a little uncapped pricing power there. In other words, whether that $1.95 box of candy could just as easily sell for $2 or $2.25. Because if you sell at $2.25 it adds another 30 cents a pound. It was $4.8 million on 16 million pounds. Which on a 25 million purchase price was fine. We didn’t do any marketing. We never hired a consultant in our lives. I mean, our idea of consulting is going out and buy a box of candy and eat it.

What we did know was that they had share of mind in California. There is something special: every person in California have something in their mind about Cee’s Candy. Overwhelmingly it was favorable. They had taken a box on Valentine’s day and gave it some girl and she kisses him. If she slapped him, you know, we have no business. But as long as she kisses him, you know, that’s what we want in their mind: Cee’s Candy, getting kissed. If we can get that in the minds of people we can raise prices. I bought in 1972, every year we raise the price on December 26, I raise the day after Christmas. So everybody… we could sell a lot on Christmas. We’ll make 60 million dollars this year. We will sell 30 million pounds make $2 a pound. Same business, same formula, same everything, 60 million bucks, still doesn’t take any capital. And we’ll make more money 10 years from now. But that 60 million we make about 55 million in the three weeks before Christmas. Our company song is “what a friend we have in Jesus!” 

I mean, it is a good business. The important thing about that business is that, think about it a little, people don’t buy…most people don’t buy box of chocolate to consume themselves. They buy them as gifts, you know, somebody’s birthday, or more likely, it’s a holiday. Valentine’s day is the single biggest day of the year. Christmas is the biggest season by far. Women buy for Christmas and they plan ahead and buy over a two or three-week period. Men buy on Valentine’s day. They are driving home, we run ads on the radio, you know. Guilt! Guilt! Guilt! Guilt! You know the guys are steering off the freeway the freeway right and left. They won’t dare to go home without a box of candy when we get through with him on our radio ads. Valentine’s day is the biggest day. Can you imagine going home on Valentine’s day and our Cee’s Candy is now 11 bucks a pound thanks to my brilliance. Let’s say there is candy available at $6 a pound. But you really want to walk in on Valentine’s day and hand – I mean we have got all this favorable image of Cee’s Candy over the years and she sees you and that’s the way she thinks of you during the rest of year, I mean we have really got it badly – and you walk in and say: “honey, this year, I took the low bid…” and hand her a box of candy? I mean, it just doesn’t work. In a sense, it is a…there is an uncapped price…it’s not price dependent basically. 

Think of Disney, I mean, Disney is selling, will say, home video on…I don’t know…whatever… $ 16.95, $18.95 or whatever. All over the world, people, and we will say particularly, mothers in this case, have something in their mind about Disney. I mean, every person in this room, when you say Disney, have something in their mind about it. If I say Universal Pictures you don’t have anything (special) in your mind, you know. If I say 20th Century Fox, you don’t have anything special in your mind. But if I say Disney, you got something in your mind. That’s true around the world. Now picture yourself with a couple of young kids, you know, who you want to put away a couple of hours every day, when you get old, to get peace of mind. you know if you get them one video they will watch it 20 times. So you go to the video store where you buy the videos. Are you gonna sit there and premier, you know, 10 different videos and watch each for an hour and half after to decide which one your kids should watch? No. I mean, let’s say there is one there for $16.95 and in the Disney there it’s $17.95. You know if you take the Disney video, you gonna be OK! So you buy it. You don’t have to make a quality decision on something that you don’t want to spend the time to do. So you can get a little bit more money if you’re Disney, and you will sell a lot more videos. It makes it a wonderful business. It makes it very tough for the other guys. How would you try to create a brand – Dreamworks is trying – but how would you try to create a brand that competes with Disney around the world and to replace the concept that people have in their minds about Disney with something, say, Universal Pictures? So the mother’s gonna walk in and pick up the Universal Pictures video and preference to Disney? It’s not gonna happen. 

Coca-Cola is associated with people being happy around the world where every place they are happy. Disney World, or Disneyland, or the World Cup will be it, or the Olympics, where people are happy. Happiness and Coke go together. Now you give me, I don’t care how much money, and tell me I’m gonna do that with RC Cola around the world and have 5 billion people to have a favorable image in their mind about RC Cola? I can’t get done. You know, you can fool around…you can do anything you wanted to. You can have price discounts on weekends, anything. But you are not gonna touch it. That’s what you want to have in a business. That’s the moat. You want that moat to widen. If you are Cee’s Candy, you want to do everything in the world to make sure that the experience, basically, of giving that gift leads to a favorable reaction. That means that what’s in the box. It means the person that sells it to you. Because all our business is done when we are terribly busy. I mean people come in those weeks before Christmas or on Valentine’s day. There are long lines. Five o’clock in the afternoon, some woman is selling the last person the last box of candy. That person has been waiting in line for maybe 20 or 30 customers. If the salesperson smiles at the last customer, our moat is widened. If she snarls at him, our moat is narrowed. We can’t see it. It’s going on every day. But that’s the key to it. I mean, the total part of product delivery is having everything associated with the Cee’s Candy and something pleasant happening. That’s what business is all about. 

Warren: Yeah! (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question).

Student: On a personal account, how much quantitative analysis you would consider versus qualitative analysis? Have you ever bought a business when the numbers told you not to?

Buffett: Those are the best buy…the question is “have I ever bought a company where the numbers told me not to and how much is qualitative and how much is quantitative” The best buy has been the numbers almost tell you not to. I mean, because, then you feel so strongly about the product and not just the fact you are getting used to the “cigar butt cheap.” It’s compelling. I owned a windmill company at one time. You know, windmills are cigar butt, believe me. I bought it very cheap, I bought it a third working capital. We made money out of it. But there is no repetitive money to be in there. It’s a one-time profit, or something like that. It’s not the thing to be doing. I went through that phrase. I brought streetcar companies, all kinds of things. In terms of the qualitative, I probably understand the qualitative the moment I get the phone call. Almost every business we bought, it has taken 5 or 10 minutes. I mean, in terms of analysis. We bought two businesses this year. General Re is, you know, 18 billion, or something, deal. I’ve never been to their home office. I hope it’s there. There could be just a few guys and say: “Well, what numbers should we send Buffett this month?” I can see them coming here once a week or month (and they may say) “We’ve got 20 billion in the bank this month instead of 18 billion” or something. I have never been there.

Before I bought Executive Jet, which is fractional ownership of jets. Before I bought it, I had never been there. I bought my family a quarter interest in the program 3 years earlier and I had seen the service and seemed developed well. I got the numbers. If you don’t know enough to know about the business instantly, you won’t know enough in a month or two months. I mean, you have to have some sort of the background of understanding and knowing what you do understand and don’t understand. That’s key. It’s what I call defining your circle of competence. Everyone got a different circle of competence. The important thing is not how big the circle is. The important thing is staying inside the circle. If that circles only got 30 companies in it out of thousands on the big board. As long as you know which 30 they are, you are OK! You should know those businesses well enough so that you don’t need to read or do lots of works. I did a lot of works in the earlier years, just to get familiar with businesses. 

The way I would do that is I would go out and use what Phil Fisher called the “Scuttlebutt approach.” I would go out, I talked to customers, I talked to…maybe ex-employees in some cases, I talked to suppliers, everybody. Every time I see somebody in an industry, let’s say, I was interested in the Cola industry. I would go around to see every Cola company and I would ask every CEO: “If you can only buy stock in one Coke company which was not your own, which one would it be, and why?” You piece those things together and you will learn a lot about the business after a while. And, it’s funny, you will get very similar answers as long as you ask about competitors. I would say it: “If you got a silver bullet, you can put it through the head of one competitor. Which competitor and why?” You will find out who the best guy in the industry in that case…the one that is coming up. So there is a lot of thing you can learn about a business. I have done that in the past, on the business I feel I could understand. I don’t have to do much of that anymore. The nice thing about investing is that you don’t have to learn everything very new. I mean, you can do If you want to, but If you know about Wrigley’s chewing gum 40 years ago, you still understand Wrigley’s chewing gum. It’s not a lot of great insights to get or anything of the sort. You do get a database in there. 

I have a guy, Frank Rooney, who ran Melville for many years. His father-in-law died and had owned H.H. Brown, a shoe company. He put it up with Goldman Sachs. But he was playing golf with a friend of mine here in Florida and mentioned it to this friend. The guy said: “why don’t you call Warren?” He called me after the golf match and in 5 minutes I basically had a deal. 

But I knew Frank, and I know the kind of business. I sort of knew the basic economics of the shoe business, so I could buy it. Quantitatively, I got to decide what the price is. But, you know, that is either yes or no. I mean, I don’t fool around a lot when I got into negotiations. If they name a price that makes sense to me, I buy it. If they don’t, you know, I was happy the day before, so I will be happy the day after without owning it. 

Warren: Yeah (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question)! 

Student: Coca-Cola has announced their profit expectation, return, and future earnings in the following quarters earnings. In light of the fact that Coke have lots of their profits coming in from the outside of United States, how do you think of the Asian crisis so as to speak is going to affect Coke regarding its business around the world? 

Buffett: The question is about the Asian crisis and how does it affect companies like Coke that recently announced the earnings. Actually, they just announced their third-quarter earnings a few weeks ago. They tipped people off: there will be lower in the fourth quarter also. 

Well, basically I love it because the market for Coca-Cola’s products is going to grow far faster over the next 20 years internationally than it will in the United States. It will go over the United States on a per capita basis because they will grow faster elsewhere. The fact that it’s going to be a tough period for – who knows – 3 months or 3 years, but it won’t be tough for 20 years. I mean people are still going to, you know, work productively around the world. They are going to find that this is a bargain product in terms of the potion of their working day that they have to give up in order to have one of these, or better yet, 5 of them in a day like I do.

It’s a, you know, this is a product, in 1936 when I first brought six of those for a quarter and sold them for a nickel each. It was in a 6.5-ounce bottle and you pay the 2 cent deposit on the bottle. That was a 6.5-ounce bottle for a nickel at that time. It’s now a 12-ounce can which you can buy it on weekends if you are buy in bigger quantity because…so much money doesn’t go into the packaging. You essentially can buy the 12 ounces for not much more than 20 cents. You are paying not much more than twice the per ounce price in 1936. It’s a product that has gotten cheaper and cheaper and cheaper relative to people’s earning power over the years, and which people love. In 200 countries, you have a per capita use going up every year for a product of over 100 years old and dominates the market. I mean, that’s unbelievable. One thing that people don’t understand, that is one thing that makes this product, that worth tens and tens of billions of dollars, is one simple fact about – really, old Cola – but we will call it Coca-Cola for the moment, the name I like.

Cola has no taste memory. You can drink one of these at 9 o’clock, 11 o’clock, 3 o’clock, 5 o’clock. The one that you drink at 5 o’clock will taste just as good to you as the one drank early in the morning. You can’t do that with Cream Soda, Root Beer, Orange, Grape, you name it. All of those things accumulate on you. Most juices and beverages accumulate on you. You get sick of them after a while. If you eat… I mean, we get these people go to work for Cee’s Candy. We told them: “you all get the candy you want.” The first day they all go crazy. But after a week they are eating about the same amount they are eating as if they are buying it. Chocolate accumulates on you. Everything accumulates on you. There is no taste memory to Cola. That means you get people around the world, there are heavy users that will drink five a day or diet coke or maybe 7, 8 a day or something of the sort. They will never do that with other products. You get this incredible per capita consumption. The average person in this part of the world, may be a little north of here, drinks about 64 ounces of liquids a day. You can have all 64 ounces of that be Coke. You will not get fed up with coke, if you like it, to start with, in the least. But if you get with almost anything else, you will just eat one product all day you tend…you will get a little sick of that after a while.

It’s a huge factor. Today, over one billion eight-ounce servings of Coca-Cola’s products will be sold in the world. That will grow year by year. That will grow in every country virtually. It will grow on a per capita basis. 20 years from now it will grow a lot faster internationally than in the US. I really like that market better because there is more growth there over time. But, it will hurt them in… it is hurting them in the short term right now. But that doesn’t mean anything. 

Coca-Cola went public in, I think it is 1919. Stocks sold for $40 a share. Went back before that is the Chandler family. They went back…they bought it for 2,000 bucks for the business. It is the Chandler back in the late 1880s and a couple of purchases. Then it went public in 1919, $40 a share. One year later it was selling for $19 dollars, going down 50% in 1 year. You might think it was some kinds of disaster. You might think that sugar prices increased and the bottlers were rebellious, and all bunch of things. You could always find a few reasons why that wasn’t the ideal moment to buy it. Years later you have seen the Great Depression. Then You have seen the World War II. Then you have seen sugar rationing. Then you have seen thermonuclear weapons. The whole thing…there is always a reason. But in the end if you bought 1 share for 40 bucks and reinvested the dividends it would be worth about 5 billion now. That factor so overrides anything else, I mean, if you are right about the business, you will make a lot of money. The time part of it is a very tricky thing. I don’t worry about any given event, if I have got a wonderful business, whether what it does the next year, something of the sort. You know, price controls had been in this country various times. That fouled up even the best of businesses. I mean, I wouldn’t able to raise the prices on December 26 of the Cee’s Candy, if we have price control. We had them in this country but that doesn’t make it a lousy business if that happens because you not going to have price controls forever. We had them in the early 70s. 

The wonderful business, you know, you can figure out what will happen, you can’t figure out when they will happen. You don’t want to focus too much on when, you want to focus on what. If you are right about what, you don’t have to worry about when very much. 

Buffett: Is there an area I’m missing back there? Any place? Because only I want to make sure I’m not focusing all at one place. I mean, we got this gentleman over here (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question).

Student: Most successful…(unclear)…what…(unclear)…mistakes have you made…willing to make…(unclear)

Buffett: The question is about my business mistakes or how much time do you have. The interesting thing about business is this: in investments – at least for me and for my partner Charlie Munger – the biggest mistakes have not been mistakes of commission but they’ve been mistakes of omission where we knew enough about the business to do something. For one reason or another, we sat there sucking our thumbs instead of doing something. We’ve passed up things where could have made billions and billions of dollars from things we understood. Forget about things we don’t understand. The fact that I can make billions from Microsoft but it doesn’t mean anything because I never understand Microsoft. But I can make billions out of healthcare stocks and we should have made it. I didn’t. When the Clinton healthcare program was proposed and they all went in the tank, we should’ve made a ton of money out of that because I can understand it. I didn’t make it. I should have made a ton of money out of Fannie Mae back in the mid-eighties. I understood it and I didn’t do it. Those are billion-dollar mistakes – or multibillion dollars mistakes – that the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles don’t pick up. 

The mistakes you see…we made a…it isn’t “we” …I made a mistake buying US Air preferred some years ago. I mean I had a lot of money around. I make mistakes when I get cash. Charlie tells me: “to go to a bar instead, do not hang around the office.” But I hanged around the office and I got money in my pocket. I just did something dumb. It happens every time. I bought this thing, nobody made my buy it. I now have an 800 number I call every time I think about buying stocks in the airline and they will talk me down. I will say: “I’m Warren and I’m air-aholic.” Then the guy will say: “keep talking, don’t hang up, don’t do anything rash!“ Finally I will get over. But…I…I bought it you know. It looked like we were gonna lose all our money in that. We came very close to losing all our money. You can say we deserve to lose our money.

We brought it because it was an attractive security, but not an attractive business. I did the same thing with Solomon. I brought an attractive security in a business I wouldn’t have bought the equity in. So you can say that’s one form of mistake: buying something because you like the terms when you don’t like the business that well. I have done that in the past, probably will do it again.

The bigger mistakes are the ones from omission.

I did – back then I had 10,000 bucks – I put 2,000 dollars of them in the Sinclair service station, which I’ve lost. So my opportunity cost is about 6 billion right now. Fairly big mistake. It makes me feel better when Berkshire goes down because the cost of my Sinclair service station goes down too. My 20% opportunity cost.

But I will say this. You talked about learning from mistakes. I really believe it’s better to learn from other people’s mistakes as much as possible. But we don’t spend any time looking back at Berkshire. I got a partner, Charlie Munger, who has been pals for 40 years, never had an argument. We disagree on things a lot, but we don’t have argument about them. We never look back. We just figured there is so much to look forward to, there is just no sense thinking about what we might have done. It just doesn’t make any difference. I mean you can only live your life forward. 

You can learn something, perhaps from the mistakes… the big thing you should do is to stick with businesses you understand. So there is a generic mistake of getting outside of your circle of competence. You know, buying something because somebody tips you off or something of the sort in an area you don’t really think about…you should learn something from that. You should stay with what you can figure out yourself. You really want your decision-making to be…by looking in a mirror. Saying to yourself: “I’m buying 100 shares of General Motors at 55 because…” it’s your responsibility if you are buying it. It’s gotta be a reason. If you can’t state the reason, you shouldn’t buy it. Because somebody told you at a cocktail party? Not good enough. It’s gotta be something…you know…it can’t be because the volume, the chart looks good, or anything like that. It’s gotta be a reason you buy the business. That…we stick to it very carefully. That’s one of the things Ben Graham had taught me.

Buffett: Yep!

Student: What will be current general economic situation around the world? Or our economy is simply still not jiggering along quite well, where are we going? When could happen on interest rate?

Buffett: the question is about what is going to happen on interesting rates and where we are going now in the world. I don’t think about the macro stuff. I just…important…what you really want to do in your investment is to figure out what’s important and knowable. If it is unimportant and unknowable, you forget about it. What you talked about is important but in my view it’s not knowable. Understanding Coca Cola is knowable, or Wrigley’s, or Eastman Kodak. You can understand those businesses. That’s knowable. What it turns out to be important depends on what you evaluation be, the firm price, all of that. But we have never either bought a business or not bought a business because of any macro feeling of any kind. We don’t read things about predictions about interesting rates or business or anything like that because it doesn’t make any difference. 

I mean, let’s say in 1972 when we bought Cee’s Candy. I think maybe Nixon put on the price controls a little bit later. Let’s say we had seen that. So what? We’ve had missed the chance to buy something for 25 million that is earning 60 million pre-tax now. We don’t want to pass up the chance to do something intelligent because of some predictions about something that we were no good at it anyway. So we don’t read, or listen to or do anything in relation to the macro factors at all. Zero. The typical investment counseling organization goes out and they give you…they bring out their economists, they chart them out, give you the macro picture and then they start to working from there on and…down. In our view that’s non-sense. If Alan Greenspan was on one side of me and Robert Rubin on the other side and they both were whispering in my ear exactly what they were going to do the next twelve months, it wouldn’t make any difference to me what I would pay for Executive Jet or General Reinsurance or anything else I do. 

Warren Buffett: Yep!

Student: what’s the benefit of being an out-of-towner as oppose to being in Wall Street… …(unclear)…

Buffett: Well, what’s the benefit of being an out-of-towner as opposed to being in the Wall Street? I worked in the Wall Street for a couple of years. I like…I got my best friends are, actually, on both coasts. I like seeing them. When I got I ideas, I will go there. The best way to think about investment is to be in a room with no one else and just think. If that doesn’t work, nothing else is gonna work. The disadvantage of being in any kinds of market-type environment, the Wall Street will be the extreme, is you will get overstimulated. You will think you have to do something every day. 

I mean, the Chandler family paid 2,000 bucks for this company (Buffett shows his bottle of Coke). You don’t have to do much else, do you? Just pick one of those. The trick is to not do anything else. Even not to sell it in 1919， which the family did later on. What you are looking for is a way to get one good idea a year and then ride it to its full potential. That’s very hard to do with an environment where people are shouting prices back and forth every 5 minutes and shoving reports under your nose and all that. Wall Street makes its money on activity. You make your money on inactivity, you know. I mean, everybody in this room trade their portfolio around every day with every other person, you know, you all are gonna end up broke. The intermediaries will end up with all the money. On the other hand, if you all on a group of average businesses and just sit there for the next 50 years. You will end up with a fair amount of money and your broker will be broke. His activity is…he is like a doctor get paid on how often you get to change pills, I mean, basically. If he gives you one pill and cures you for the rest of your life, he has got one sale, one transaction. That’s it. But if he can convince you that changing pills every day is the way to great health, it will be great for him to be a prescriptionist and you will be out of a lot of money and you won’t be any healthier. You will be a lot worse off financially. 

You want to stay away from any environment that stimulates activities. Wall Street will have the effect of doing that. I would…I use…when I have go, I go back about once every 6 months. I will go back with a whole list of things I want to check out or companies I want to see. I will get my money’s worth out of those trips but then I will go back to Omaha and think about it. 

Warren Buffett: Yep!

Student: How should investors evaluate ownership of Berkshire Hathaway or Microsoft, if they don’t pay dividends to their investors? 

Warren Buffett: Well…the question with Berkshire Hathaway, the question is about evaluating Berkshire when it doesn’t pay any dividends. It won’t pay any dividends either. It’s a promise I can keep. All you get with Berkshire, you still get your safe-deposit box. Every year you can fondle it, you know. You take it out and put it back. I mean, there is an enormous psychic reward in that. You don’t underestimate it.

The real question is whether we can keep retaining dollar bills and turning them into more than a dollar at a decent rate. That’s we try to do. Charlie Munger and I all have our money in to do that. That’s all we will get paid for doing it. We won’t take any options. We won’t take any salaries. We don’t pick up anything. We ride around the plane. That’s what we are trying to do. It gets harder all the time. The more money we manage the harder it is to do that. We would do way better percentage wise with Berkshire if it is 1/100 the present size. It is run for its owners. But it isn’t run to give them dividend. Because, so far, every dollar that we’ve earned and could have paid out, we have turned into more than a dollar. It worth more than a dollar to keep it. It would be silly to pay out, even if everybody is tax-free to own it. It would have been a mistake to pay dividends of Berkshire because so far the dollar bills retained have turned into more than a dollar. There is no guarantee that that will happen in the future. At some point the game runs out on that. But it’s the goal. I mean, that’s what the business is about. We are not…nothing else about the business do we judge ourselves by. We don’t judge by the size of the home office building or, you know, anything of the number of people working around it. We got 12 people at headquarters, we got 45,000 employees at Berkshire. 12 people at headquarter, 3,500 square feet and we won’t change it. We will judge ourselves by the performance of the company. That’s the only way we will get paid. But, believe me, it is a lot harder than it used to be. 

Warren Buffett: Anything way in the back because I want to make sure then I’m not missing people back there that haven’t called. Ok, then we will go to the…how about way over there, on the…

Student: What makes you decided that investment reaches its full potential?

Warren Buffett: I missed the…what makes me decide to invest what?

Student: Investment. When will your investment have reached its full potential? As you said earlier that you will…

Warren Buffett: I missed the last part…

Someone else helped repeat the question: What makes you decided that investment reaches its full potential?

Warren Buffett: Oh, reaches its full potential. Well…ideally you are buying businesses when you feel that it will never happen in terms of… I mean, I don’t think…I don’t buy Coke with the idea that it’s going to out of gas in 10 years, you know, or 15 years. It, I mean, it could be something happen but I would think the chances of that are almost null. What we really want to do is buy businesses that we would be happy to own forever. It’s the same way I feel about people buying Berkshire. I want people to buy Berkshire then plan to hold forever. They may not, for one reason or another. But I want them, at the time they buy it, to think they are buying a business that they are gonna hold forever. I don’t say that’s the only way to buy things. It’s just that that’s the group I want to have joined me. Because I don’t want to have a changing group all the time. I measure Berkshire by how little activities there is in it. If I have a church and I was the preacher, half the congregation left every Sunday, I wouldn’t say: “Oh this is marvelous, I gonna have all this liquidity among my members! This terrific turnover!” You know, I would…I would rather get a church where all the seats are filled with, you know, every Sunday, by the same people. Well, that’s the way we look at the businesses we buy. We want to buy something that we are really happy to own virtually forever. We can’t find a lot of those. 

When I started, I had way more ideas than money. I was just constantly having to sell what I thought was the least attractive stock in order to buy something that I just discovered the book value even cheaper. But that’s not the problem really now. So we hope we are buying businesses that we are just as happy with it five years from now as now. If we ever find some huge acquisition, you know, we have to sell something, maybe, to make that acquisition. But that would be a very pleasant problem to have. We never buy something with a price target in mind. We never buy something at 30, saying “If it goes to 40 we will sell it”, or 50, or 60, or 100. We just don’t do it that way any more than… when we buy a private business like Cee’s Candy for 25 million, we don’t say to ourselves if we ever…if we ever get an offer 50 million for this business we will sell it. That’s just not the way we look at the business. We look at the businesses, “Is this going to keep producing more and more and more money over time?” If the answer to that is “Yes,” you don’t need to ask any more questions. 

Warren Buffett: There is…yeah, way back there. 

Student: With this same principle in mind, what would it be for, take the case of Salomon, and similarly, for Long Term Capital…how do you quote the evaluation…

Warren Buffett: Well, Salomon, like I said, I went into that because it was 9% security in 1987, September 1987, the Dow was up 35% that year. We had sold a lot of stuff, and I had a lot of money around I don’t…it looked like to me that we are never getting any chance to do anything. So I took an attractive security form in a business I would never buy the common stock of it. I went in because of that. I think that’s generally a mistake. It worked out OK finally on that. But it…it’s not what I should have been doing. I should have…we should have waited, in which case, I could have bought more Coca-Cola a year later or thereabout. We should have bought Coke at the prices they were selling at. Even though it wasn’t selling at a pretty price at the time. That was a mistake. At Long Term Capital, that’s…we have learned other businesses that are associated with securities over the years. One of them is arbitrage. I have done arbitrage for 45 years. Graham did it probably 30 years before that. That’s a business. Unfortunately, I have to be near a phone, for I have to…I have to really run out of the office myself. Because it requires being more sort of market-attuned. I don’t want to do that anymore so I…unless a really big arbitrage situation came along and I understood. I won’t be doing much of that. But we… I have probably been in 300 arbitrage situations at least in my life, or maybe more. It’s a good business. Perfectly good business. 

Long Term Capital has a bunch of positions. They had got tons of positions but the top 10 are probably 90% of the money that’s at risk. I know something about those ten position. I don’t know everything about them by a long shot. But I know enough where I would feel OK at a big discount going in and we would have the staying power to hold it out. We might lose money on something like that. But the odds are with us. That’s a game that I understand. There are a few other positions we have that aren’t that big because they can’t get that big. But they involve… they could involve yield curve relationships…or on-the-run, off-the-run government, or things like that. They are just things you have learned over time if you are around securities market. They are not the base of our business. Probably on average, they have accounted for 0.5% our return a year…or 0.75% a year of our return. They are little pluses that you will get for…for actually having just been around a long time and learning a little bit about them. 

The first arbitrage…not the first arbitrage…but one of the first arbitrage I did involved the company where you…they were offering cocoa beans in exchange for their stocks. That was in 1955. I bought this stock, turned into the stock, got warehouse certificates for cocoa beans. They had to be a different type that were trading in the cocoa exchange. But there was a basis differential. My favorite! I sold them. I mean, that’s just something that I was around at the time so I learned about it. It haven’t been a cocoa bean deal ever since. 40 odd years I have been waiting for another cocoa bean deal. I haven’t seen it. But it’s there in my memory whenever it comes along. And that…Long Term Capital is that on a big scale. 

Warren: Yeah! (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question)

Student: You basically build an investment… (unclear)… know… (unclear)… involve… (unclear)… diversification… (unclear)…

Warren Buffett: The question is about diversification. I have got a dual answer to that. If you are not a professional investor, if you goal is not to manage money in such a way to get significantly better return than the world, then I believe in extreme diversification. I mean, I believe 98% or 99%, maybe more than 99% of people who invest should extensively diversify and not trade. That leads to them an index fund type of a decision with very low cost. Because all they are going to do is to own a part of America and they have made a decision that owning a part of America is worthwhile. I don’t quarrel with that at all. That the way they should approach it unless they want to bring in intensity to the game, to make a decision and start evaluating businesses. But once you are in the businesses of evaluating businesses and you decided that you are going to bring the effort, intensity, time involved to get that job done, then I think that diversification is a terrible mistake at any degree. 

I got asked the question when I was at the SunTrust the other day. If you really know businesses, you probably shouldn’t know more than 6 of them. I mean, if you can identify 6 wonderful businesses, that is all the diversification you need. You can make a lot of money and I will guarantee you that going into a 7th one is going to…you rather putting more money in your first one. It’s gotta be a terrible mistake. Very few people have gotten rich on their 7th best idea. But, a hell lot of people got rich on their best idea. I would say that for anybody working with normal capital who really knows the businesses that they have gone into, a 6 is plenty. I probably have half of it what I like the best. 

I don’t diversify, personally. All the people I know that have done well – with the exception we have mentioned Walter Schloss earlier. Walter Schloss diversifies a lot. He owns a little of everything. I call it Noah. You know, you have got two of everything. 

Warren: Yeah! (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question)

Student: How to do differentiate the Coca-Cola of the world and Procter & Gamble of the world?

Warren: Well, Procter & Gamble is good… a very very good business. Strong distribution capability, lots of brand name, and everything. But if you ask me, if I’m going to be away for 20 years, put all my family’s net worth in one business. Whatever Procter & Gamble or Coke? Actually, Procter & Gamble are a little more…be more diversified among product lines. But I would feel sure of Coke than Procter & Gamble. I wouldn’t be unhappy if somebody told me I have to own Procter & Gamble during a 20-year period. That would be in my top 5% because they are not going to get killed. 

But, I would feel better about the unit growth and pricing power of Coke over a 20 or 30 years than I would about Procter & Gamble. Right now the pricing power might be tough. But if you think about a billion serving a day, an extra penny means $10 million a day, you know. We own 8% of it, that’s $800,000 a day for Berkshire Hathaway, if you get another penny out of this stuff. Doesn’t seem impossible, does it? I mean, it worth another penny with it. Right now it would be a mistake to try to get it in most market. But overtime, Coke will make more per serving than it does now. 20 years from now I will guarantee you it will more per serving. It will be selling a whole lot more serving. I don’t know how many of them or how much more, but I know that. 

P&G’s main products, I don’t think they have the kind of dominance and they don’t have the kind of unit growth. But they are good businesses, you know. I wouldn’t be unhappy if you told me that I have to put my family’s net worth in P&G and that was the only stock I can own. I would, you know…I might prefer other names but there are a hundred other names I would prefer. 

Warren Buffett: Yeah! (Buffett lets one of student audience to ask a question)

Student: What are you going to say about McDonald’s if you’re going away 20 years from now?

Warren Buffett: McDonald’s…the question is about McDonald’s if I’m going away for 20 years. McDonald’s has got a lot of things going for it. Particularly, abroad, again. I mean their position in abroad and in many countries is stronger relatively than in here. It’s a tougher business over time. People do not want to eat, except for the kids when they are giving away beanie babies or something. People do not want to eat at McDonald’s every day. For people are drinking Coke today, if they drink 5 ounce today, they probably drink 5 tomorrow. The fast food business is tougher than that. But if you have to pick one hand to have in the fast-food industry, which is gonna be a huge business worldwide, you pick McDonald’s. I mean it…they have the strongest position. It doesn’t win taste test, you know, with adults. I mean, it does very well with children, and does fine with adults. But it does… I mean…it is not…it is not like it is a clear winner. It has got into the game in recent years of being more price promotional and, you know, you remember the experiment a year ago or so. And that…so it has got more dependent on that rather than just selling the product by itself. I like product by itself sells. I feel better about Gillette if people buy the Mach 3 because they like the Mach 3 than if they get a beanie baby with it. You know, I mean…so I just think it’s fundamentally a stronger product if that’s the case. You know, it probably is. 

We own a lot of Gillette. You can sleep pretty well at nights if you think of a couple of billion men with their hair growing on their faces, you know. It is growing all night while you are asleep, you know. Woman have to legs, it’s even better. So it beats counting sheep. Those are the kind of business...but if you are gonna think: “what promotion am I going to put out there to gets Burger King next month”, “what if they sign up with Disney and I don’t get Disney.” I mean…that is…I’m…I like the products that are standalone, in absence of promotional pricing appeals. Although you can build a very good business based on that. McDonald’s is a terrific business. It is not as good businesses as Coke. But that…you know, there are really hard…hardly any…it’s a very good business. If you bet on one company in that field, aside from Dairy Queen – I’m off the question – you might pick McDonald’s. We bought Dairy Queen here awhile back, that’s why I’m plugging it shamelessly here.

Warren Buffett: Yeah, way back there. 

Student: What do you think of the electric and utility industry?

Warren Buffett: What do I think of what?

Student: Electric and utility industry. 

Warren Buffett: Electric and utility industry? Well…I thought about that a lot. Because you can put big money in it. And I’ve even thought of buying entire businesses. There is a fellow in Omaha actually has done a little of that though CalEnergy. But I don’t quite understand the game in terms of how it is going to develop with the regulations. I mean…it’s…it’s gotta… I can see how it destroys a lot of value for the high-cost producer, once they are not protected by a monopoly territory. And I don’t, quite for sure, see how…who benefits and how much. I mean, obviously, the guy with the very low cost power, some guys got the hydropower you know, 2 cents a kilowatt or something like that. He’s got huge advantage. But how much of that is getting kept or everything? How extensively he can send that outside this natural territory? I haven’t able to figure that out with certainty. 

So I really think I need to know what the industry is going to look like in 10 years. But it is something that I think about. If I have ever developed any insights call for action, you know, I will act on it. Because I think I can understand the attractiveness of the products and it’s…all of that. All the aspects of certainty of user need and the fact that there is a bargain, all of that. I understand. I just don’t understand who is going to make money in it 10 years from now. That keeps me away.

Warren Buffett: Yep!

Student: What do you think that the market is favoring the large-cap, blue-chip stocks over small-cap stocks? And what helps you view…(unclear)

Warren Buffett: The question is “large cap vs small cap”. And why “large-cap over-perform”. I don’t know the answer to that. We don’t think…we don’t care whether a company is large cap, “gigantic-cap”, middle-cap, small-cap, micro-cap. Doesn’t make any difference. The only question we care about is “can we understand the business”, “do we like the people running it”, “is the business itself and price are attractive.” From my personal stand point running Berkshire now, because we got Pual Former for Gen Re. I don’t know what we have, maybe 75 or 80 billion dollars to invest. And I only want to invest in about 5 things. So I’m really very limited to very big companies. But if I were to invest in 100,000 dollars, I wouldn’t care whether something is large cap or small cap or anything. I would just look for businesses I understood. Now… I think, on balance, large cap companies as businesses have done extraordinary well in the last 10 years and way better than people anticipated they would do. I mean you really have American businesses earning close to something 20% on equity. That’s something that nobody had dreamt about. That’s being produced by very large companies in aggregate. So you have this huge evaluation upward of in… because of lower interest rate and much higher return on capital. You know, if American businesses are really bonds, disguised bonds that earn 20% – have 20% coupon – much better than the bonds that earn 13% coupon. That’s happening with big companies in recent years. Whether it is permanent or not is another question. I’m skeptical of that. But I don’t… I wouldn’t even think about… except for the question “how much money we run” … I wouldn’t even think about the size of businesses. 

A good one, Cee’s Candy was a 25 million dollars’ business when we bought it. I mean if I can find one that is just like it now, if it is the biggest we’ve found, you know, I got to buy it. It is the certainty of it that counts.

Warren Buffett: Yeah, way over there!

Student: I mentioned earlier that buying stocks in service companies or policy companies. Once a while, until the last five years, the real estate has been primarily private.  …(unclear)…securitization of real estate. I wonder what is your insight into the industry. 

Warren Buffett: Yeah… you talk about the real estate… I mean securitization. Normally securitization of … of … the debt too … the real estate. That is one of the items right now that is really clogging up the capital market. I mean, the mortgage-backed securities are… they are just not moving in commercial mortgage-back, not residential mortgage-back. So that… but I think that you are directing you question at equity probably. 

The equities… if you leave out… the corporate form has been a lousy way to own equities, I mean. You interject the corporate income tax. That isn’t something when people individually have been able to own with a single tax. By having the normal corporate form, you get to have a double taxation. You really don’t need it with real estate. It takes away too much rate of return. REITs have in effect created a conduit so you don’t get the double taxation. But they also generally have fairly high operating expenses. If you get real estate, let’s just say you can buy fairly simple type of real estate at an 8% yield thereabouts. And you take away maybe close to 1 or maybe 1.5% by the time you count stock options and everything. It’s not a terribly attractive way to own. Maybe the only way a guy with a thousand bucks or 5 thousand bucks can own it. But if you have a million dollars, or 10 million dollars, you are better off owning a real estate property yourself. You are saving some intermediaries in-between, who will get a sizable piece of return for themselves. 

We have found very little in that field. You will see an announcement in the next couple in the next couple weeks that I may belie what I’m telling you. I don’t want you to think … I don’t want you to think I was double-crossing up here (Buffett giggled). But generally speaking, we have seemed very very little in that field that gets us excited. People sometimes get very confused about… they will look at some huge land companies. I will take one that you won’t get emotional reaction on the parts of it. Texas Pacific Land Trust, which has been around for over 100 years. They have got a couple acres of Taxes. They will take the… they sold 1% of their land every year. They will take that as a plying and everything and come up with some huge value compared to the market value. But that’s nonsense if you really own the property. You can’t move 50% of the property or 20% of the property. It is way worse than owing liquid stocks. So you get these… I think you get these silly evaluation placed on a lot of real estate companies by people who really don’t understand what is it like to own one and try to move large quantity of property. 

REITs behave terribly in the market this year as you know. And it is not all unconceivable that they will become a class… they will get so unpopular that they will sell at significant discounts from which you can sell the properties for. They can get interesting as a class but then the question is “would the management will fight you in the process”. Because they will be giving up their income stream for managing things. Their interests may run counter to the show or some of that. I always wonder about the REITs that say, you know, “our assets are so wonderful, they are so cheap.” And they go out and sell stocks. There is a contradiction to that. They say “a stock at 28 is very cheap” and they sell a lot of stocks at 28 less underwriting commission. There is, you know, they either… there is a disconnect there. 

But it’s a field we look at. I mean, Charlie and I can understand real estate. And we will be open for very big transactions periodically. If there is a “Long Term Capital Management” situation translated to real estate, we will be open to that. The trouble is many other people will be too. They will be unlikely to go to a price that would really get us excited. 

Warren Buffett: Way back there.

Student: My understanding of your theory is that, sort of, down market is terrific for net savers. Can you sort of get into your thought about whether the market is going upward or downward or stagnant, long term profits and short term profits … (unclear)?

Warren Buffett: Well, yeah, I have got… I have got no idea where the market is gonna go. I prefer it is going down. I haven’t… my preferences have nothing to do with it. The market knows nothing about my feelings. That is one of the first thing you have to learn with the stocks. If you buy 100 shares of General Motors, all out of the sudden you have this feeling about General Motors. I mean, if it goes down you may be mad at it, you may say “well, if it just goes to what I had paid for, my life will be wonderful again.” Or if it goes up you may say how smart you were, how you and General Motors have this love affair. I mean, you got all these feeling. Stock doesn’t know you own it. Stock just sits there, it doesn’t care what you paid, doesn’t care if you own it, or anything. So any feelings I have about the market is not reciprocated. It is the ultimate… it is a very cold shoulder we are talking about here. 

Anybody in this room, let’s say, practically everybody in this room is more likely to be a net buyer of the stocks over the next 10 years than a net seller. So everyone of you should prefer lower prices. I mean if you are going to be a net eater of hamburger the next 10 years, you want hamburger to go down unless you are cattle producer. If you are going to be a buyer of Coca-Cola and you don’t own Coke stock, you hope the price of Coke goes down. You are looking for it to be on sale this weekend when you are in the supermarket, you want it go down in the weekends not up in the weekends when you gonna tend the supermarket. 

New York Stock Exchange is a big supermarket of companies. You are going to buying stocks. What do you want it to happen? You want those stocks to go down, way down. And you will make better buys then. Later on, 20 years from now, 30 years from now, you are in the period when you dis-saving, or lairs dis-saving for you then you got… I mean, then you may care about higher prices. But I find people… that was one of the… that’s chapter 8 in Ben Graham’s “intelligent investor” about the attitude toward stock market fluctuations. That and chapter 20 on the “margin of safety” are the two most important essays ever written on investing as far as I concern. Because when I read chapter 8 when I was 18, I figured, you know, I just figured out what I just said but… it is obvious, but I didn’t figure out myself though. It was explained to me. I probably would have gone another 100 years if I hadn’t  read it. I would still thought it was good when my stocks were going up. 

We want things to go down but I have no idea about what the stock market is gonna do. I never do. I will never will. It is not something that I think about at all. When it goes down I feel… I look harder when I might buy that day because I know there is more likely to be some merchandise there. I can use my money effectively.
